# Organize Rust All-Hands 2025

| Metadata         |                      |
|------------------|----------------------|
| Point of contact | @m-ou-se             |
| Teams | <!-- TEAMS WITH ASKS --> |
| Task owners      | <!-- TASK OWNERS --> |
| Status           | Proposed for flagship            |

## Summary

Organise another Rust All-Hands in 2025!

## Motivation

It's been too long since we've had a Rust All-Hands. Time to bring it back!

### The status quo

Previous Rust All-Hands events were very useful and successful, but after the changes at Mozilla, we haven't had a Rust All-Hands in six years.
Meanwhile, the project has grown a lot, making it much harder and expensive to organise a new Rust All-Hands.

A few months ago, when Jack brought up having a new Rust All-Hands in the Leadership Council meeting,
Mara proposed having the new Rust All-Hands at [RustWeek 2025](https://2025.rustweek.org) by [RustNL](https://2025.rustweek.org/about/), which will take place in the Netherlands around the 10th birthday of Rust 1.0.
Both RustNL and the Rust Leadership Council agreed.

See https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2024/09/02/all-hands.html

### The next 6 months

- Prepare the all-hands and everything around it.
- Have a social and informal "pre-all hands day" on Rust's 10th birtday: May 15, 2025.
- Have a two-day all-hands on May 16 and May 17, 2025.
- During the all hands, coordinate reviews of the proposed [Rust Vision Doc](./rust-vision-doc.md)

### The "shiny future" we are working towards

The immediate goal is a very successful and productive Rust All-Hands 2025.
Hopefully, this will be the first step towards the larger goal of having regular Rust All-Hands again.

We should be able to use the feedback and lessons learned from this event for the next ones,
and to figure out what the right frequency would be (yearly or less often).
Repeating an event tends to be much easier than organising one from scratch.

## Design axioms

- Accessibility. Ideally, everyone in the project should be able to attend the Rust All-Hands
- Productivity and effectivity. We should optimally make use of the event, to make it worth everyone's time.
- Low stress. The event or the planning of it should not burn anyone out. It is a tool to help the project and its members, after all!
- Space for social events. The goal is not just to work on technical things together, but also to get to know each other and become a closer team.

## Ownership and team asks

**Owner:** Mara

| Task                                      | Owner(s) or team(s)            | Notes                                                             |
|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pick the dates                            | [RustNL], [leadership-council] | ![Complete][]                                                     |
| Allocate funds                            | ![Team][] [leadership-council] | ![Complete][] for event                                           |
| Allocate funds                            | Rust Foundation                | ![Complete][] for travel                                          |
| Book the venue                            | [RustNL]                       | ![Complete][]                                                     |
| Catering / snacks / food / drinks         | [RustNL]                       | ![Complete][]                                                     |
| [Register] for the Rust All-Hands 2025    | *every project member*         | Majority already signed up!                                       |
| Send out conformations/tickets            | @m-ou-se                       |                                                                   |
| Send out detailed information             | @m-ou-se                       |                                                                   |
| Answer logistical questions               | @m-ou-se                       |                                                                   |
| Interface between project and RustNL      | @m-ou-se                       |                                                                   |
| Make hotel reservations                   | [RustNL]                       | In progress                                                       |
| Book hotel                                | *all participants*             | RustNL will provide suggestions                                   |
| Book travel                               | *all participants*             |                                                                   |
| Miscellaneous                             | ![Team][] [leadership-council] | Prepare one or two plenary sessions                               |
| Submit talks for the "Rust Project Track" | *project members*              | Possibility to give talks at the conference before the all-hands. |
| Moderation / safety                       | [RustNL] and moderator team    |                                                                   |
| Accessibility and covid safety            | [RustNL]                       |                                                                   |
| Come to the Rust All-Hands 2025           | *all participants*             |                                                                   |
| Reimburse travel costs                    | Rust Foundation                |                                                                   |

### Team swag

| Task          | Owner(s) or team(s)            | Notes                                          |
|---------------|--------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Miscellaneous | ![Team][] [leadership-council] | Decide on team swag; suggestions very welcome! |
| Acquire swag  | [RustNL]                       |                                                |

### Make plans for what to do at the all-hands

| Task                                     | Owner(s) or team(s)        | Notes                                          |
|------------------------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Gather input from your teams             | *team leads* (or delegate) |                                                |
| Provide input for planning team          | *team leads* (or delegate) |                                                |
| Make an agenda for your team's room      | *team leads* (or delegate) |                                                |
| Coordinate the overall process           | Planning team              | Small group of 2-3 people. Volunteers welcome! |
| Make a room plan (after gathering input) | Planning team              |                                                |

### Organise an optional "pre all-hands day"

| Task                    | Owner(s) or team(s) | Notes                                                               |
|-------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Organisation            | @m-ou-se, [RustNL]  | An optional day without an agenda, with space for social activities |
| Acquire gifts (secret!) | @m-ou-se            | ![Complete][]                                                       |

[RustNL]: https://rustweek.org/about/
[Register]: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSeeoEsZGLGokSK0Gn8GVRHhM23KgbwKsp67oxi79KfdsbipkQ/viewform

## Frequently asked questions

### I'm so excited about the all hands!

Me too!

### How will we schedule meetings?

@jackh726 asked:

>  The key challenge here is going to be scheduling meetings for teams with overlapping membership. Likely it'll probably make sense to stagger team meetings such that there are blocks of time with very few overlaps of "official" meetings (with the acknowledgement that maybe that means during those times the parallelism goes down).

@m-ou-se answered:

> Yeah that's part of the reason for a "Planning team" to "Coordinate the overall process". Hopefully we can make the draft agendas public early so teams can work together directly to align their plans a bit. It's going to be a fun puzzle though. ^^

### Who can attend?

@jackh726 asked:

> One thing I haven't seen listed is who other than the Project is/may attend? From what I remember, there is a separate space available - it would be really good to have an actual list for that, which is available to Project members, since people may be interested in chatting/coordinating.

@m-ou-se answered:

> There will be an unconference at the same venue that will host groups like the embedded working group, Rust for Linux, Bevy maintainers, UI/App developers, and a few other groups. That part is handled by RustNL as a mostly separate event, that just happens to take place in the same location.
>
> RustNL will of course share which groups that will be once they confirm, so we can coordinate potential collaboration with these groups. But from a organisation (and funding) perspective, we treat the all-hands and the unconference as mostly separate events, which is why I didn't include it in the project goal.
